Introduction to PL/SQL

PL/SQL (Procedural Language/SQL) is Oracle’s extension of SQL that adds procedural features such as variables, loops, conditions, and exception handling.
It allows developers to write logic-based programs directly inside the database.

PL/SQL supports:

Variables and constants

Control structures (IF, loops)

Exception handling

Cursors

Triggers

Procedures and functions

✅ 2. Unnamed (Anonymous) PL/SQL Block

An unnamed PL/SQL block, also called an anonymous block, is a block of PL/SQL code that does not have a name.
It is not stored permanently in the database and is executed only once when run.

Structure of an Anonymous PL/SQL Block:

DECLARE section – for declaring variables (optional)

BEGIN section – main executable statements

EXCEPTION section – handles errors (optional)

END;

Anonymous blocks are used for:

Small tasks

Quick calculations

Testing logic

One-time operations

✅ 3. Control Structures in PL/SQL

Control structures allow decision making and looping inside PL/SQL programs.

✅ IF – THEN – ELSE

Used to perform actions based on conditions.

IF condition

IF-ELSE

IF-ELSEIF

✅ Loops

PL/SQL supports 3 types of loops:

Basic LOOP

FOR LOOP

WHILE LOOP

Control structures allow:

Checking number of days

Calculating fine

Changing book status

Applying different conditions for fines

✅ 4. Exception Handling in PL/SQL

Exceptions are errors that occur during execution.
PL/SQL provides a mechanism to handle such errors gracefully.

✅ Types of Exceptions

Predefined (system) exceptions
Example: NO_DATA_FOUND, TOO_MANY_ROWS

User-defined exceptions
Created by the programmer

Named exception handlers
A specific handler is defined for a known exception

✅ Why Exception Handling is Important?

Prevents program failure

Provides meaningful error messages

Allows the program to continue safely

Helps maintain data integrity

In the assignment, exception handling is used to manage situations where:

Roll number does not exist

Book details are not found

Incorrect input is given

✅ 5. Problem Context (Library Fine System)

The assignment demonstrates how PL/SQL logic works using a library management example.

Two tables are given:

Borrower – Contains student details, book name, date of issue, status

Fine – Stores fine amount and date for students returning books late

The PL/SQL block must:

Accept roll number and book name

Calculate number of delayed days

Apply fine rules:

15–30 days → ₹5 per day

More than 30 days → ₹50 per day

Insert fine details into the fine table

Change book status from “issued” to “returned”

Handle errors using exceptions

✅ 6. Use of DATEDIFF / Date Calculations

PL/SQL can calculate the difference between dates to determine:

How many days the book is overdue

Whether a fine should be applied

Fine amount based on number of days

Date difference is essential for:

Determining if fine is needed

Calculating exact fine amount

✅ 7. Business Logic Implementation

The assignment shows how real-world business logic is implemented using PL/SQL:

Condition checking using IF statements

Inserting data into Fine table if fine exists

Updating Borrower table

Handling missing data with an exception handler

This demonstrates how PL/SQL can automate tasks that cannot be done with normal SQL alone.

✅ 8. Importance of the Assignment

This assignment teaches:

How to write PL/SQL blocks

How to use variables

How to use IF conditions

How to use exceptions

How to interact with multiple tables

How to implement practical business rules

It is one of the core foundations of PL/SQL programming.